
#PROTEIN

#amino acids
alanine
arginine
asparagine
aspartate
aspartic acid
cysteine
glutamate
glutamic acid
glutamine
glycine
histidine
isoleucine
leucine
lysine
methionine
phenylalanine
proline
serine
threonine
tryptophan
tyrosine
valine

#small peptides
glycyl-l-histidyl-l-lysine
glutathione
tuftsin
hemorphin-4
met-enkephalin
leu-enkephalin
angiotensin i
l-carnosine
l-anserine
kyotorphin

#LIPIDS

#fatty acids
butyric acid
caproic acid
caprylic acid
capric acid
lauric acid
myristic acid
palmitic acid
stearic acid

#phospholipids
phosphatidylcholine
1-oleoyl-2-palmitoyl-phosphatidylcholine
lecithin
dioleoyl phosphatidylcholine
distearoyl phosphatidylcholine
dilauroyl phosphatidylcholine
glyceryl monostearate
glyceryl tributyrate
glyceryl tricaproate
glyceryl tricaprylate
glyceryl tricaprate
sphingosine
n-palmitoylsphingosine
n-stearoylsphingomyelin
n-lauroyl-d-erythro-sphingosine

#steroids
danazol
drostanolone propionate
ethylestrenol
exemestane
mesterolone
metandienone
metenolone acetate
metenolone enanthate
methyltestosterone
nandrolone decanoate
nandrolone phenylpropionate
norethandrolone
oxandrolone
oxymetholone
stanozolol
testosterone undecanoate
trenbolone enanthate
trenbolone acetate
cholesterol
estradiol
estrone
hydroxyprogesterone
nandrolone
progesterone
testosterone
testosterone cypionate
testosterone enanthate
testosterone propionate
trenbolone

#CARBOHYDRATES

# 4-carbon monosaccharides
erythrose
threose
erythrulose

# 5-carbon monosaccharides
ribose
arabinose
xylose
lyxose
ribulose
xylulose

# 6-carbon aldoses
allose
altrose
glucose
dextrose
mannose
gulose
idose
galactose
talose

# 6-carbon ketoses
psicose
fructose
sorbose
tagatose

# disaccharides
sucrose
maltose
trehalose
lactose

#alcohol sugars
sorbitol
xylitol

#NUCLEIC ACIDS

# nucleobases
adenine
cytosol
guanine
thymine
uracil

# nucleosides
adenosine
cytidine
guanosine
thymidine
uridine

# nucleotides
adenosine 5'-monophosphate
cytidine 5'-monophosphate
guanosine 5'-monophosphate
thymidine 5'-monophosphate
uridine 5'-monophosphate
#oxy thymidine = 5-methyluridine
5-methyluridine 5'-monophosphate

# 3' monophosphate
adenosine 3'-monophosphate
cytidine 3'-monophosphate
guanosine 3'-monophosphate
thymidine 3'-monophosphate
uridine 3'-monophosphate

# diphosphates
adenosine 5'-diphosphate
cytidine 5'-diphosphate
guanosine 5'-diphosphate
thymidine 5'-diphosphate
uridine 5'-diphosphate
deoxyuridine 5'-diphosphate

# triphosphates
adenosine 5'-triphosphate
cytidine 5'-triphosphate
guanosine 5'-triphosphate
thymidine 5'-triphosphate
uridine 5'-triphosphate

deoxyadenosine triphosphate
deoxycytidine triphosphate
deoxyguanosine triphosphate
deoxythymidine triphosphate
deoxyuridine triphosphate

zidovudine triphosphate


